---
title: "Keyboard Madness"
date: 2021-07-07T14:16:51+02:00
---
A year ago I got my first mechanical keyboard. It was a cheap one with no
worthy brand name to back it up. At first I was amazed since this was the first
mechanical keyboard I ever got. It bought blue switches since I had primarily
for writing, mostly code so it seemed like the ideal choice.

The keyboard was obviously very noisy (due to the blue switches) which annoyed
people around me no end. I didn't really mind it as I was using headphones a
great deal of time. However after being stuck home due to the pandemic I grew
tired of wearing headphones all the time and took them off every moment
possible. This of course meant that I got to experience the keyboard noise in
all it's glory and Boy, was it loud.

### New Keyboard?

I had been on the lookout for ergonomic keyboard for quite some time and this
seemed like the perfect moment to get one. I was in particular interested in
split keyboards. If you don't know what those are, essentially it is a keyboard
split in to halves which can be positioned for better angle of your arms since
putting them together on one keyboard can feel quite cramped and cause various
issues with your wrists. Arguably the most famous ones are Ergodox keyboards
and I was looking into them.

### The Forbidden Fruit

I was doing some work on a few projects which I needed to be strictly POSIX
compliant. I decided to develop them on a platform which was much stricter out
of the box than GNU is. Two options presented themselves. A FreeBSD box which
was running on an old desktop of mine which I basically use as a file server.
Or the family shared Mac Pro. As I never worked with Mac OS before and enjoy
trying new things I decided to give the Mac a go.

Now I won't comment how development is on Mac OS I didn't try quite enough
things, but it has shell, vim, Emacs and clang so all is good in my books. But
surprisingly enough what stood out to me the most (after the screen quality)
was the keyboard. Some people despise it, some people swear by it and I became
of the second kind. The small wireless low profile Apple Magic Keyboard.

Now the keyboard was all fine and dandy on Mac OS it was not quite so well
suited for other systems. The lack of some keys (Delete, Page Up and Down, Home
and that entire area missing) proved to be quite troubling. Now there are ways
to work around that I didn't find it good enough also I hadn't given up on the
idea of a split keyboard quite yet.

### A Difficult Customer

So now I had two main criteria for purchase: A split keyboard and as if that
already wasn't difficult enough chiclet on top of that. After a tough search I
managed to find one that was not custom build and it even was in stock locally!
What a catch! The name of this beauty is R-go split. As the name would suggest
it is a split keyboard, however it has magnets on the inside and you can also
use it as a regular keyboard should you want that. It also happens to be very
portable which is sure to come in handy when I can finally go places. Neat!

### All Set For Typing, Right?

Well, yes and no. The hardware is on point now. But what about how the keyboard
types. Specifically the layout? I am going to assume that you are using QWERTY,
QWERTZ or AZERTY. These were designed back in the day when mechanical
typewriters were used. The layout was chosen so that common letter pairs are
far from one another to avoid key jamming (if you press two in rapid succession
the keys would jam and you have to unstuck them manually). This is obviously
not the case anymore and as it turns out it is not the optimal layout for
modern computers.  Alternative layouts were created to address this issue most 
famously the Dvorak layout.

### Learning Dvorak

Now if you are into alternate keyboard layouts you might ask why Dvorak in
particular? Aren't there better layouts these days, right? Surely Dvorak had
been obsoleted? I mean there is Colemak, Workman and others, why Dvorak? That
is a good question. I chose Dvorak precisely because it is the oldest. It has 
the most support and it will be available wherever I need. There are also
variants that have native support for some accent characters which I need from 
time to time. And despite what some people think it is quite decent when it 
comes to languages other than English.

The basic idea behind Dvorak is to alternate hand as much as possible hence why
the vowels are concentrated on the side where left hand touch types and
consonants on the right. This works fairly well even in other languages. Where
Dvorak shines in particular is the home row. A good selection of English words
are located entirely on the home row thus minimising finger movement.

### Will Another Layout Make Me A Better Typist?

Highly unlikely, in fact a lot of people get about the same speed and precision
on Dvorak as QWERTY or any other layout for that matter. Why bother then? One
place where I saw a massive improvement was typing comfort and ergonomics which
is what I am focusing on now the most. Unless you spend a significant time of
your day typing, whether that be programming, writing books or articles it
won't likely be worth learning. I however fall into this category and decided
to give it a go since I had a period of almost two months where I won't be
typing almost at all.

### The Learning Process

Learning a new layout was a pain. No sugar coating it. I was not a particularly
fast typist on QWERTY but we learned touch typing in school and it stuck with
me. Dvorak has only two letters in same positions and those are a and m. That's
it. Everything else is moved somewhere. The two main resources I used for
learning was:

=> https://learn.dvorak.nl link

and GNU Typist or gtypist. I think it is better to start learning words as fast
as possible since hitting individual letters is very unrealistic and can lead
to weird habits. After about a week of daily practice I knew the entire layout.
Or at least in theory. Muscle memory is something entirely different. I decided
to go head first and switch to it as my primary layout after about 10 days.

### The Leap of Faith

It was painful. This is how typing must feel for people who don't use the
computer regularly. Maybe it was even worse since they don't know any better.
It had an interesting upside, however. I argued with people less. Since the act
of typing out just about anything was stressful enough arguing on top of it was
just plain hell. Also you didn't have the advantage of spamming you opponent
with evidence due to the poor speed. I think I partially reattained it even now
since I saw how useless even destructive it was to argue like this. Or maybe
I'm just being to optimistic about it. You chose.

### The Now

Fast forward to now. I have been using Dvorak for about six weeks and about a
month as my only layout. How is it? Pretty good actually but here are few
things you might want to keep in mind.

### What I Learned

First thing is. Unless you practice QWERTY the muscle memory will go away.
Quite quickly at that. I'm barely able to type it now after only a month and
mostly use hunt and peck when I absolutely have to. It is not nearly frequently
enough for me to bother with practising both.

Second thing. Shortcuts. They were made with QWERTY in mind. Copy, paste and so
on. I heard that Mac OS has a layout which is Dvorak but switches to QWERTY the
moment you press the command key so that Ctrl V stays in the same location as
it is on QWERTY. There is nothing like for GNU/Linux as far as I know. But I
would not use it anyway, the shortcuts are fine in my opinion. Not as easy to
do with one hand, but doable for the most part.

Third. Vim. Oh is Vim a pain in Dvorak. Some people rebind every key so that it
stays the same as in QWERTY. This seems a little excessive to me as the
bindings are decent enough in Dvorak. Most people who use both (which is a
really small group) seem to use it as is. Emacs bindings are actually alright,
sometimes even better since it was made for easy memorisation not best
ergonomics. The only thing that feels a little weird are A-x and C-x.
I actually use the default Emacs keybindings now (I just rebound Caps Lock to 
Control and it's good). There is also Dvorak layout for Ergomacs should you 
want that. It's really good.

EDIT: As of 3rd of September I am now fully back to vim. It took a little while
to learn with Dvorak but it was much worth it.

### Conclusion

Was it worth it? For me it was and I'm glad I did it now rather than later. The
typing comfort truly is considerably better. I am slowly getting to where my
typing speed in QWERTY was. I think I might actually surpass it eventually
since I did not practise and try to improve QWERTY. The transition made me more
aware of typing in general.

> Have a great day and keep computing fun.